---
layout: post
title:  "Rebalancing: The Socio-economy of Shandong Province Entering a New Normal"
date:   2017-1-8 01:00:00
last_modified_at:  2014-12-15 01:00:00
excerpt: "Shandong province has begun the transition from unsustainable debt financed growth to an economy based on consumer spending..."
categories: economics, China
tags:  [China, economy, politics]
image:
  feature: shandong-title.jpg
  topPosition: -300px
bgContrast: dark
bgGradientOpacity: darker
syntaxHighlighter: no
---
Sources: [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walt_Disney)

Abstract: This essay examines several key structural issues imbedded in China’s economy. I focus on Shandong province in particular because it is viewed as the bellwether for other provinces. Shandong province has begun the transition from unsustainable debt financed growth to an economy based on consumer spending. I argue that this transition is essential for the economic and social stability of the province and the country. By looking at demographic trends, lifestyle data from the census, a variety of economic figures, my argument is firmly supported. Often China’s economy is talked about in broad, tenuous statements– melding a massive social-economy into boilerplate phrases. I want to present the underlying facts of a particular provincial economy and assess the underlying socio-economic issues. This should be an interesting read for those concerned about China’s economy, society, and global growth. Even more, I shed light on the problem of China’s household registry system, positing that a sustainable economy must reform this barrier. Moving forward, I propose three policy reforms that aligns with China’s transition into a consumer driven economy.

<blockquote class="largeQuote">“The emergence of social values as the prerogative for development marks a turning point in China’s model of growth” </blockquote>

In a recent speech by Premier Li Keqiang, China’s model for development took a unexpected turn. Contrary to the expectations of those skeptical of China’s reform-oriented regime, the Premier detailed a vision of a 21st century in striking rhetoric. The next decade, the Premier claimed, would include, “raising personal income… strengthening the social safety net and continually improving people's livelihoods” (Li 2014). Wealth was just one of three desires of the Chinese, Li asserted, adding that they desire “a richer cultural life and social justice” (Li 2014). The emergence of social values as the prerogative for development marks a turning point in China’s model of growth. For decades since the countries opening-up, China’s leaders have underscored the parties pledge for economic growth, yet rarely have commitments to justice and culture been affirmed; with these words, the Premiers words broke from tradition. But just twelve days after the Premier’s speech, one-hundred workers protested in Shandong province requesting better wages and social security–evidence of Beijing’s neglect of welfare policies. This was not an isolated event, by the end of 2014 there would be 85 protests in Shandong, demonstrating a growing trend in the province’s labor. Broiling in the factories of coastal cities is palpable unrest, coupled with rising expectations and demand for accountability from the government (China Labour Bulletin 5 August 2015).

<div class="img img--fullContainer img--14xLeading" style="background-image: url({{ site.baseurl_posts_img }}chonqing-text.jpg);"></div>

As China adjusts to a slower domestic and global economy, the varying strands of Shandong society will face a formidable disruption to the status quo. This essay focuses on Shandong province, where a socioeconomic system approaches a liminal moment in reform. From a state-led investment strategy towards an economy sustained by household consumption, Shandong is at the forefront of the extensive rebalancing of China’s economic model. Shandong’s relatively established urban middleclass, 49 million, signals an economy driven by consumer spending, a direction spearheaded in the Chinese Communist Party’s Third Plenum reform blueprint (note. From Shandong Urban Population China, 2013; Yuan 2011). At the same time, Shandong faces obstacles in modernizing. The most significant, as I will argue, is the systemic rural-urban divide galvanized by the household registration system (hukou). In the short term, the hukou impedes full-citizenship, but will eventually obstruct the provinces economic potential (Chan 2012). While top-tier cities like Qingdao and Jinan host a dynamic modern society employed in private technology business, the periphery is a large floating population of rural migrant workers, undercutting China’s next phase in socio-economic development.

For this purpose, this paper details the implications of the social and economic structure in Shandong. On this view, Shandong’s low-productivity, labor intensive framework is unsustainable; a shift towards a household consumption, highly productive sectors, and robust social services will unlock considerable economic potential. The hybridization of Shandong’s two societies together represents the coterminous trajectories of China’s economic growth.  This essay argues first, at the core of Shandong’s economy is the marginalization of rural migrant labor and is, secondly, a barrier towards developing a sustainable economy. Thirdly, this essay posits that the rural-urban division is a chief impediment to expanding the middleclass, a class crucial for Shandong’s social and economic growth. Finally, as China enters it’s “New Normal” economic growth, the second generation of rural migrant labor will be a primary threat to social stability. I will then briefly purpose three policy recommendations that would reform hukou inequalities that underpin Shandong’s structural transformation.

<blockquote class="u--startsWithDoubleQuote">“Indeed, the eternal grind of factory production afforded better wages, bringing the millions of farmers out of poverty, a laudable achievement of Shandong’s development strategy. However, this approach comes with severe implications for long-term development and social stability. Underpinning Shandong’s industrial ascendency are systemic inequalities between rural and urban populations...” <br/> </blockquote>

#### Shandong's Birth

Shandong province has historically existed at the nexus of commerce since ancient times (Roberts 1837). In recent decades, the Chinese Communist Party has transformed the agrarian province into a heavily industrialized zone beginning with Deng Xiaoping’s ‘opening-up’ of China to international trade. In the nascent stage of industrialization, eighty-two percent of the population lived as rural peasants working in intensive agriculture practices (Siauw 2014). But Shandong soon transformed its’ economy into a leading exporter of machinery to markets in North East Asia (National Bureau of Statistics of the Peoples Republic of China 2012). The auspices of Shandong’s geographic location – Shandong’s coastline reaches three-thousand kilometers with deep water ports – afford access to international trade, thus bolstering Shandong’s burgeoning industrial sector. Moreover, investments from Japan and South Korea bolster an enduring regional trade cohesion and technological sharing, growing to the scale of billions of USD (Siauw 2014).  By 2012, according to data from the International Monetary Fund, Shandong grew at a rate of 9.8% GDP, with an output of 793.86 billion USD. This growth significantly raised the standards of living for millions as employment and wages grew (International Monetary Fund 2012; Hilsenrath 2015). Overall, the trajectory of Shandong province, from the experiment of Deng’s liberalization to a hub of high-tech innovation and manufacturing, represents the future of China. The facets underlying Shandong’s transformation, though not fully developed, were on the track to develop a high income society. Contingent for Shandong’s complete shift to a sustainable, consumer driven economy was its foundational socio-economic structure. In liberalizing their economy, Shandong ran into a great wall barring this trend: the rural migrant worker.

Inseparable from this impressive economic growth was a massive reorganization of society.  Millions of rural peasants migrated into factory jobs seeking to benefit from endless quotas in manufacturing, mining, and construction. Shandong’s model of development relies on employing rural migrant workers in labor intensive, low wage, factory jobs, without social services. In doing so, Shandong’s export’s assured competitive edge, low labor costs benchmark it’s “China Price.” But at a cost to domestic consumers who receive meagre wages. Shandong’s comparative advantage of abundant, cheap labor cemented a society that relies on disproportionate rate of household savings and state financed growth to fuel massive state spending.

This model has a deadline that is fast-approaching. As it is, the China Model for growth belies the rights of rural-migrant workers, unnaturally alters demographic trends, and stifles business competition. Compounding the systemic fissures in Shandong’s economy is the emerging second generation of rural migrant laborers who demand accountability from their local governments (Cai 2011). Indeed, the eternal grind of factory production afforded better wages, bringing the millions of farmers out of poverty, a laudable achievement of Shandong’s development strategy. However, this approach comes with severe implications for long-term development and social stability. Underpinning Shandong’s industrial ascendency are systemic inequalities between rural and urban populations.

Central to the economy of Shandong province is the marginalization of the rural underclass through the hukou household registration. Functioning like an “internal passport,” the hukou was instrumental for Mao Zedong’s government to regulate the movement of rural and urban bodies, tethering populations to their homeland. This ensured surplus population of rural peasant labor to farm on land plots, while the smaller, privileged urban class could work in higher paying jobs and receive social benefits.

This system evolved with a wave of urban industrialization, stimulated by state and foreign investment: the privatization of agriculture reduced the need for workers as new urban factories provided steady wages. China’s market driven reforms prioritized coastal cities with access to ports. Thus, the channel of money flowed into manufacturing, directly bolstered Shandong’s economy: by 1997 the province was the third wealthiest in the nation with a high per capita gross output of eight-thousand yuan (Cai 1997).  And in doing so, rural labor was permitted to migrate to sweat-shop factories to supply low-cost, expendable labor, essential element to create the ‘China price’. It was during this period that Shandong’s core industrial cities, Jinan and Qingdao, received high levels of inter- and intra- provincial migration; in fact, close to one-hundred percent of Jinan’s total migrants were from rural areas (note. From Cai 1997: Shandong Census Office 1990, Beijing 1992; Population Data in All Counties 1994, compiled by Ministry of Public Security of China, Beijing 1995). This population migrating between 1985-1990 period formed the core of Jinan and Qingdao’s factory labor, with the vast majority seeking employment in construction and heavy industry (Cai 1997). Though this model created imbalances in population distribution attracting the majority of the working age population from the country periphery, skewing real population statistics in cities. While urban hukou holders accounted for twenty-seven percent of the total population, rural migrant workers occupied seventy-three to ninety (72.7 - 86.6) percent of urban population, presaging further inequalities imbedded in this structure (Cai 1997).

While the hukou system enabled China’s model output growth model, it is unsustainable. The stratification of social classes institutionalizes severe inequalities, thus undermining the viability of this economic system. Despite living and working in cities, rural migrants remains “rural” citizens, where they are legally excluded from housing, education, welfare, and social services, nullifying upward mobility. As such, the oversupply of rural laborers mandates those migrating to industrial cities to work in low-skill factory and service jobs. The 3-D (dangerous, dirty, and demeaning) labor sector is highest for rural hukou holders, estimated of 34317 (10,000 persons) (China Statistical Yearbook, 2014; All China Data Center). Indeed, Shandong’s largest industry by GDP is in the secondary sector, which employs millions in state-driven infrastructure projects (Siauw 2014). In effect, this economy sustains China’s traditional model of development in two aspects: highly labor intensive production centers creating cheap exports for the international market and debt-financed infrastructure projects. The problem underlying both is the need for cheap, expandable labor. The problem moving forward is utilizing the full potential of human capital to generate real wealth, not a debt overhang and crater of misused labor.

Stark inequality is the definitive feature of Shandong’s hukou system. Further evidence of this economic stratification is the difference of per capita disposable income of households. Urban households average a net-income of 30,628 yuan, nearly a third larger than the average rural household income of 10,619 Yuan (China Statistical Yearbook, 2014). This translates into urban households having four times larger disposable income to spend on non-essentials; migrant laborers, in effect, live hand-to-mouth (China Statistical Yearbook, 2014). With the majority of income going to basic living needs, to food (34 percent, housing (20 percent), and transportation (15 percent), expenses for education is a meagre 7% and healthcare is 9% (China Statistical Yearbook, 2014). Compared to urban households in Shandong whose top three expenditures are on food 32%, transportation 14%, and clothing 13% (China Statistical Yearbook, 2014). The stark contrast between urban-rural expenditures on education is telling, while urban household in Shandong afford 1909.84 Yuan, rural households spend 571.6 Yuan (China Statistic Yearbook, 2014). According to the China Statistical Yearbook, Shandong’s total population is 9,734 (10,000 persons) with a divide between the 54% of urban household population and 46% of rural households.

But these figures do not indicate the population of 1,213,500 million temporary residents, persons who are local residents without local hukuo (All China Data Center). In other words, this is the “floating population” of migrant workers migrating from rural Shandong to live and work within industrial cities.  This is a large sector in society who do not receive welfare or social services from the government undermining the assumed benefits of urbanization (Chan 2009). Without a robust consumer class Shandong wont fully shift into a consumer driven economy; the systemic marginalization of rural hukou undercuts the necessary household wealth to drive a consumer based economy.  

Further, the hukou system is driving social instability. As young migrant’s inherit their social identity, this generation is heir to the compounding discriminations against rural citizens. This generation of laborers demand more than wages from factories and representation from local government. Made worse, as Shandong transitions away from export growth model, unemployment is rising with closing factories. As a result, Shandong’s rebalancing economy is giving rise to worker protests, hitting the laborers in industrial cities hardest (China labor Bulletin 2015). Sixty-three percent of all protests in Shandong correlated with manufacturing and construction clashes, igniting strikes in Tengzhou, Jining, and the thousands that marched from Feicheng to the provincial capital Jinan (China Labor Bulletin 5 August 2015). A rise in labor strikes represents a generations shift in Shandong’s industrial cities as the children of rural migrant laborers enters the workforce. This generation is characterized by improved education, informed of human rights and higher expectations for social mobility. (Chan 2010). Unlike the previous generation, this generation of rural-migrant labor represents a significant shift in values; their demand is not just for factory wages but social services, pay increases, and government accountability (China Labor Bulletin 2014).

Indeed, this segment of society both wield power in numbers which makes their precariousness a threat to social stability. Their ease of mobilizing labor protests through social media apps like WeChat and Weibo presents unprecedented power with disaffected youth (China Labor Bulletin 2014). Thus, the ability to network with peers has resulted in a surge in worker protests. From 2011 December to 2013 there were 470 strikes by factory workers, 40 percent of 1,171 total worker protests during same period. The majority of these protests center around worker’s demand for wage arrears, a recent trend in China’s recent slow growth, portending growing unrest in China’s rebalancing economy (China Labor Bulletin 5 August 2015). A swell of factory and mining closures are leaving hundreds of thousands rural-migrant laborers unemployed suggesting an impending crisis for Shandong’s local government (China Labor Bulletin 5 August 2015).

Yet, this problem rarely registers in government policies. Rural-migrant laborers in Shandong’s cities exist as sub-citizens; cheap, and expandable labor, with a dearth of political clout. But Shandong’s bureaucrats should take bold steps to reform the hukou system. As it is, this system is unsustainable, reaching the fissures inherent in a society founded on exploitation. The hukou divide is, therefore, the crux of Shandong’s development model. Abdicating the borders between rural and urban societies is imperative in Shandong’s rebalancing of the economy, where the full urban residence is granted to rural hukou holders.

The concomitance between urbanization and consumer spending is not without reason. For full liberalization to occur in Shandong, institutional restrictions on citizenship should be revoked. A second tier population will undermine efforts to stimulate household spending, just as it broils social instability. Rural-migrant labor earn less but are expected to pay the cost of living in the city and many end up living in slum-like conditions at the cities periphery. As a result, middle class expansion is undercut by limits of spending on education, housing, and other services. The excesses of Shandong’s first-wave of development are today’s speed-bumps in rebalancing economic power from the government towards citizens. However, with policy changes, a middle-class migrant labor could emerge as the drivers of China’s “new normal” (Kroeber 2013).

China’s potential greatest threat to social and political stability will originate from those most vulnerable to the economic slowdown– rural-migrant labor. To be sure, the inputs-driven model has brought astounding growth of China’s economy in the past decade. But underneath the double-digit growth is the division of citizenship, restricting full rights of rural hukou holders for the abundance of cheap labor. More ominously, rural migrant labor will undergo a brittle restructuring of China’s economy, as it adjusts to a slower growing economy. The imperative is to replace the current ‘inputs- and capital- driven growth’ with a consumer spending model, eventually letting the markets play a ‘decisive role’ (Roach 2014). Indeed, in the long-term this adjustment is critical for China’s stability and prosperity, encouraging market competition, capital compensation, and higher productivity.

However, the immediate implications of China’s restructuring face formidable headwinds. An appreciating renminbi, the halt of excessive state spending, and the closure of wasteful State Owned Enterprise (SOE) factories, directly impacts the workers of the “worlds factory.” Compounding unemployment with raising costs of living from currency appreciation, rural Chinese will endure a period of economic transition not geared towards them. Therefore, it is necessary for immediate structural reforms to make the Chinese economy work for more citizens (Chan 2013). China’s economic rebalancing is undermined if the scales of economic and political power tilt towards the elite alone because inequality will only breed instability. Thus, eliminating barriers to full citizenship, education, and employment will unleash an untapped economic and social force. As China approaches a turning point in the decade long period of double-digit growth, downshifts towards a sustainable economic model will redefine the roles of rural-migrant labor in society. At this inflection point CCP’s leaders will have to decide whether or not an economy built by a subclass is stable, or that it embodies the “China dream” of prosperity for all.

Shandong’s complete shift to a sustainable economy requires policy changes to the hukou system.  No doubt, there are significant barriers for political action. The the urban middle class are the chief stakeholders in maintaining the status quo, bearing enduring social stigmas against the rural peasants. This is compounded, or explained by, by the better treatment received by urban class from the local government in terms of social services, voice in political affairs, and job opportunities, among other things, deepening the urban class party loyalty. Simply put, the hukou system is instrumental in maintaining loyalty from the urban class and industrial sector, while pitting the disenfranchised rural class against these deeply vested interests (Wang, Organizing Through Division and Exclusion, 114-23). One real danger then is maintaining this system for too long, risking permanently embedding this systemic inequality in urban life (Wang). Therefore, the local and national government should recognize the importance of reforming the hukou system sooner than later, as the cost of inaction increases significantly. It is fortunate, then, that the party is taking strident steps to restructure their economy away from export-driven towards consumer driven model. This aligns directly with the hukou system reforms.

My proposed policy reforms fall into three principal categories: easing, lifting, eliminating. Specifically, easing urban hukou permits on selective criteria, lifting labor discrimination laws, and eliminating barriers to public services. First, local governments should begin hukou reform by selectively granting urban residency to rural labor on the basis of length of residency and family composition. While selective granting occurs, it is based on the wealth of the individual, limiting only the richest to receive urban hukou. A better approach would grant rural holders urban hukou on the basis of time of residence in cities, thus prioritizing migrants with long-term prospects for settlement. Likewise, urban hukou registration should prioritize families with children, ending the routine custom of parents leaving their children in the countryside to find work in the city.  This practice carries significant social costs, namely, a generation of children, who are termed the ‘left-behind children’. They are affected by depression, anxiety, and lack of opportunity.

This slight policy change has several benefits. First, the party will maintain control over the process, establishing a decree of party legitimacy over the social change, while easing the opposition from lodged interest in maintaining strict rural-urban divide. In time, impetus for further reform will build as hukou granting becomes the norm, a feature of modern urban life (cecc.gov). Second, focusing on households will bring families together in cities. Households are more economically stable, carry broad social benefits, and spend more on consumption. Therefore, hukou reform, beginning with centralized leadership, will lead a progressive trend towards greater social cohesion.

Second, rural hukou holders face systemic discrimination in the labor force. Ending discriminatory legal practices is the next step for hukou reform. Currently, the conditions of labor for rural migrants are characterized by low wages, wage arrears, lack of contracts, and long hours (Li 2008). In short, rural labor has no bargaining power against their main employers, the industrial sector, which creates a power dynamic abetted by laws favoring industrial interests. A study from the China’s Ministry of Labor and Social Security in 2004 revealed that on average, only 12.5 percent of rural migrant labor hold contracts with their employers (Research Office Project Team, State Council, 2006: p. 13) Therefore, policies that give legal representation for rural labor, in addition to improving access to better jobs, are the next logical steps.

This requires updating the legal framework for urban employment which gives rural labor greater leverage with their employer. This will make both parties responsible for improving work conditions and compensation, while reigning in flagrant abuses of labor rights in the industrial sector. This approach brings into line the parties objective of market-based structural reform, where liberalizing labor laws will raise the value of labor. Valid hukou reform in the long term is incumbent on ending the demand of cheap abundant labor. The long term effect of these changes would, moreover, increase social mobility of rural workers, where higher wages and opportunity to enter the skilled workforce will improve migrants’ standard of living. A wealthier blue collar worker and a service sector class would drive consumer spending, aligning hukou liberalization with China’s future economic model. With prudent government policies, the low-skill industrial workforce of today could become the dynamic service or high-tech manufacturing sector of tomorrow.
Last, and most critical, is eliminating barriers that prevent rural migrants from accessing public services. While a predominant fear of the urban class is having the rural underclass overrun public services that the rural migrants have been excluded from. These entitlements such as access to health care, housing, and education, must be provided to all urban citizens. A recent study shows that 5 percent of rural migrant labor were covered by unemployment insurance, 3 percent had access to medical insurance, and 15 percent had a pension (Li 2008). Additionally, rural migrant children are excluded from public education in cities. Estimates suggest that there are 7 to 8 million migrant children living in cities, a staggering figure considering the likelihood of these children not receiving an education. Restrictions on childhood education not only diminishes future prospects but creates long term rural-urban inequalities, especially considering the rural population’s youthful demographics (Li 2008). Therefore, channeling government spending into social services is a valuable opportunity to investment in future generations. Not only will providing a welfare safety net incur greater spending on household consumption, investments in education will reap future dividends. Spreading the benefits inherent in healthcare, education, and retirement plans will ensure social stability, especially when market-oriented reforms might lead to higher unemployment. Moreover, redirecting government spending from low-return infrastructure projects into household spending will jumpstart a dormant consumer class.

Cheap labor is no longer a viable economic growth model for Shandong. While this formula guarantees high output growth, it is done at a significant cost and further deepens long term social, environmental, and economic problems. For this reason, Shandong, like the rest of China’s provinces, is undergoing a turning point in how their economies are structured. The country has reached a turning point, and must now redefine its comparative advantage from cheap, inexhaustible labor, to a highly educated and productive workforce. For many Chinese, their lives will change dramatically as China emerges as the largest economy in the 21st century. What one’s life, the strands of work, family, and ambitions, means will be less defined by your parents. In the case of Shandong, this means pivoting to a robust middle class, where greater latitude is given to policy makers, employers, and citizens to author their future. The bellwether for China’s successful rebalancing begins with Shandong’s expanding middle class. It is with a more entrepreneurial, better educated, and supportive of policy reforms, that this vision for China’s 21st century will become reality (Yuan, et al. 2011). Hukou reforms will accelerate this trend, changing how a society coheres in a more equitable economy. Indeed, the history of China is one in which means can justify the ends.
